```
layout: post
title: "Imposter Syndrome"
date: 2017-12-10 16:54:29-06:00
tag:
excerpt: "Imposter Syndrome: Fake it til you make it"
```

# Imposter Syndrome: Fake It 'Til You Make It

Imposter syndrome is the belief that, regardless of all evidence to the contrary, you don't belong. This can lead to developers second guessing themselves, remaining silent when they probably shouldn't, and having their confidence undermined.

Over the years I've spent in software development, I have struggled with this constantly and I am far from alone. For those not in the industry, it can be hard to understand how this is possible. Even trying to introspect into my own head has been difficult at times. I'm hoping that with this post, I can shed some light on things and maybe sort out my own thoughts.

# Cause
Where does imposter syndrome come from? I believe it comes from understanding a subject well enough to understand just how little you know about that subject. This is only half of the problem though. To get the full effect, you need people that don't understand a subject to pile heaps of praise on to you for knowing said subject. These two forces create the feelings of despair and the overall sense of *"What if I'm found out?"*

Obviously, those two conditions could occur in any profession. However, I believe that these things are worse in software development for a couple of reasons.

## Enter the God Complex
It is a well known fact that many software developers have a god complex. Something about being able to write a couple of seemingly cryptic lines of code to make a computer do anything can make people drunk with power.

So, imagine that you are a lowly software developer and you come across one of these developers with a god complex. All it would take is one comment similar to *"Oh, you don't know **X**!? Haha, idiot."* to plant the seeds of doubt. Even if the words are never spoken, all it takes is for our common developer to *believe* these words are possible.

## How Many Ways to Skin a Cat?
If your concern is that you don't belong or know less than your peers, the easy solution would be to prove to yourself that you are not a fraud and that you do know things. Seems simple enough.

Of course, it's just not that easy. For that plan to work, you need to implement solutions the *right* way. Who determines what the *right* way is? The blessing and curse of software development is that there are only thousands of ways to get to the same solution. Depending on the metrics used, some of those solutions will be far better than others. That means not only knowing all of the possible solutions but a thorough understanding of the pros and cons of each. This basically leads us back to where we started.

## Staying State-of-the-Art
The speed at which the technology industry advances is truly amazing. During a normal work week, I may spend 8-10 hours per day at work writing code, plus another 2-4 hours when I get home. I will easily do another 8 hours over the weekend. This may seem like a lot but even after all of it, I know I'm still barely scratching the surface of what's out there. Imagine spending 60, 70, or 80 hours per week working on something only to learn enough to still fall behind. Fortunately for me, I love what I do and couldn't possibly do anything else but not everyone is like me. It is easy to see why this may cause some to become demoralized and filled with a sense of hopelessness.

# Fighting the Syndrome
Is all lost? I sincerely hope not but I won't pretend that I have some kind of magic solution either. As I mentioned before, I've struggled with this in the past and still deal with it to this day. All I can offer are what I believe to be helpful suggestions on how to mitigate the effects of the syndrome.

## We're All Human
When I was first starting out, I would be amazed by the more senior software developers I worked with. They seemed to know everything. It was easy to put them on a pedestal and assume that they were perfect. However, over time, I have come to realize that, just like everyone else, they would make mistakes.

Now that I am the "senior" developer on my team, I am quick to point out my mistakes to other team members. I try to show them that even as far as I've come, I'm still figuring things out. I admit when I don't know something and ask my team members for help often. I feel that it is important that each of my team members understand how beneficial they are to myself and the rest of the team.

## Keeping Developers Grounded
I speak to each of the developers on my team on a weekly basis. I try my hardest to guarantee that they all get a little one on one time. For the ones I believe may be struggling with imposter syndrome, I try to remind them that software development is a skill. A skill that takes time to really master. Most importantly, I think it is important to remember that no one is born with the ability to code. It's all about how much time you are willing to spend with it.

For those on my team that I may feel are heading on the path to a god complex, I try to remind them of how far they've come. If they can recognize the challenges that they have had to overcome then maybe they will be more understanding of what our more junior members are dealing with. Depending on how serious the case is, I may recommend some new technology to investigate. Something that can remind the developer of what it's like to be new at something.

## Perpetual Learning
I mentioned earlier about how much of my time goes to writing code. Even though feeling like you can't keep up is a cause of imposter syndrome, continuing to learn is necessary and unavoidable. It may feel hopeless but over time, the extra effort you put in will pay dividends. If you can just fight through and stick with it, after awhile, you may find that you actually know more than you thought. So, as the title suggests, fake it 'til you make it.

# Conclusions
Imposter syndrome is unlikely to ever completely disappear. If you find yourself suffering from it, the best you can do is hope to reduce its effects. The last thought I have is quite possibly the most important thing to remember about software development. If you take anything away from this post, remember that **no one knows what they're doing**. There's a reason why applications are never finished and programs are continuously being optimized. The truth is that we're all figuring this out as we go.

# Further Reading
One of my favorite blog posts is by Peter Welch where he describes why [Coding Sucks](https://www.gizmodo.com.au/2014/05/programming-sucks-why-a-job-in-coding-is-absolute-hell/). It's a pretty funny read and I highly recommend it. It definitely provides some insights into what developers are routinely asked to deal with.
