---
layout: post
title: "Zen and the Art of Unit Testing"
date: 2017-11-14 21:14:46-06:00
tag: python testing
excerpt: "Why don't programmers like nature?"
---

# Zen and the Art of Unit Testing

Some developers seriously underestimate the value of writing tests. Design decisions in code are important but how we test those decisions is just as important.

When I introduce my developers to the concept of test writing, they sometimes struggle with it. Some may even become frustrated because they feel that testing should be simple or the concepts should be easy. I believe this to be false. I always explain to my developers that good test writing should be considered an art form. It really does take a fair amount of practice to get good at it.

The purpose of this post is to present some general guidelines that I use to make testing easier. I will be sticking primarily to unit testing and will hopefully cover more functional testing in a later post. Also, there are many different python testing frameworks. I'm going to focus on [nose](http://nose.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) but the concepts should carry regardless of the framework you use.

Before getting started, it will be useful to have some reference code to test. I've created a simple Bank Account module with some basic functionality to demonstrate my recommended testing approach. All of the code can be found [here](https://github.com/kyokley/DemoBankAccount).

### When to Test?
As the name implies Test Driven Development (TDD) tells us to write tests before attempting to write any code. I've always had a little bit of a problem with this. It always felt like writing all of your tests before writing any code was like trying to go to your destination without knowing how to get there. Therefore, I generally try to get a rough idea of what my code will look like by at least writing a couple of lines. Usually, not very extensive but closer to a scaffolding that will be filled in later. Once I feel pretty good with where things are headed, I'll start my tests. If writing all of your tests before writing any code works for you, please continue. For the sake of this post, I'm going to start with the code first.

### Functional Requirements
For my demo bank account, I came up with some simple requirements. The *BankAccount* class will have a deposit and withdraw method along with a method to get the current balance. Negative values should not be allowed to be deposited or withdrawn. If an attempt to withdraw more than the balance of the account is made, raise an exception. Finally, if the balance of the *BankAccount* hits a certain level, the account should trigger a preferred status and send an email.

```python
from utils import send_email

PREFERRED_BALANCE = 1000

class BankAccount(object):
    def __init__(self, balance=0):
        self._balance = balance
        self.preferred = self._balance >= PREFERRED_BALANCE

    def get_balance(self):
        return self._balance

    def deposit(self, val):
        if val < 0:
            raise Exception('Only positive values are allowed')
        self._balance += val

        if not self.preferred and self._balance >= PREFERRED_BALANCE:
            self.preferred = True
            send_email("Congrats! You've qualified for preferred status!")

    def withdraw(self, val):
        if val < 0:
            raise Exception('Only positive values are allowed')
        elif self._balance - val < 0:
            raise Exception('Oh no! Not enough funds!')
        self._balance -= val

        if self.preferred and self._balance < PREFERRED_BALANCE:
            self.preferred = False
            send_email("Balance is too low to maintain preferred status")
```

Nothing too surprising here. There are probably some other additions that could be made but, in an effort to keep things simple, I'm going to assume inputs will be made with the correct types.

### What to Test?
I am a firm believer that each function in your actual code should have its own test class. If you think about a function as a railroad track, then each **if** is a fork in the track. The goal of our tests is to force the interpreter to go down every track. Therefore, if you have a test class for each method, methods of the test class correspond to the various permutations that put the interpreter on the different tracks.

That being said, let's start by testing the deposit method on *BankAccount*.

```python
class TestDeposit(unittest.TestCase):
    def setUp(self):
        self.account = BankAccount(balance=0)

    def test_positive_deposit(self):
        self.account.deposit(100)

        expected = 100
        actual = self.account.get_balance()
        self.assertEqual(expected, actual)
```

For those not familiar, the *setUp* method is called before each of the test methods. Since we're testing the *BankAccount* class, it makes sense to instantiate an object of our target to be used in each of our tests.

The *test_positive_deposit* method *deposits* 100 into the *BankAccount* object. Next, I assert that the 100 is returned by the account. This test is the most straightforward. Things become more interesting going forward.

### Failing on Purpose
One of the requirements of the *BankAccount* class is to raise an exception if a negative number is passed to the deposit method. Testing that a method raises an exception is slightly trickier in that you must remember that the assert function call is different but it's still pretty simple.

```python
def test_negative_deposit(self):
	self.assertRaises(Exception, self.account.deposit, -100)
```

*assertRaises* is used to check that a method raises an expected exception. The call signature to *assertRaises* takes the expected exception as the first argument, an executable method as the second argument, and finally, any arguments to be passed to the executable.

### Mocking like a Pro
The last bit of code in the *deposit* function of *BankAccount* handles setting the preferred status. When this preferred status is set, the *send_email* function is called as well. Since this is a unit test, we don't want to get caught up in attempting to actually send any emails. Unit tests should be isolated from external services. So how do we handle that?

In steps mocking. Mocking allows us to replace a function or object with a fake version. This fake version attempts to behave like the real function. After running the target function, it's possible to check how the fake function was called.

```python
@mock.patch('bank_account.send_email')
def test_preferred(self, mock_send_email):
	self.account.deposit(1000)

	expected = 1000
	actual = self.account.get_balance()
	self.assertEqual(expected, actual)
	mock_send_email.assert_called_once_with("Congrats! You've qualified for preferred status!")
	self.assertTrue(self.account.preferred)
```

Here, I'm using the patch decorator to mock out the *send_email* method. There are multiple ways to patch including using a context manager, function decorator, or in the *setUp* and *tearDown* methods. Personally, I believe that patching should occur in the *setUp* and *tearDown* but I will leave that discussion for a future post.

```python
@mock.patch('bank_account.send_email')
def test_preferred(self, mock_send_email):
	...
```

The first line is the function decorator. Behind the scenes, the decorator is responsible for replacing the *send_email* function with a *MagicMock* object. Note, when using the function decorator version of the patch method, it is required to add an argument to the test_method call signature. This additional argument allows us to make assertions on how the fake *send_email* is being used.

```python
	mock_send_email.assert_called_once_with("Congrats! You've qualified for preferred status!")
```

As the method implies *assert_called_once_with* checks that a method was only called once with the expected arguments. In this case, the "congrats" message should go out so I am testing that not only was the method called but with the correct message as well.

### Conclusions
Obviously, these tests only cover part of the functionality of my *BankAccount* class. In the future, it would be necessary to write additional test code to cover the rest of the class but I leave that as an exercise for the reader. I hope that this post has given enough of an introduction to get you started with your own testing effort. One final thought before you go...

> Why don't programmers like nature? Because there are too many bugs
